# 3.5. Machine Learning

##What is Machine Learning

###Informal definition

Learn a function from data that can generalize to predict new data.

- Learn: not explicitly program
- Function: a computer function with inputs & outputs
- Data:
- Generalize to new data:

The field of study that gives computers the ability to learn without being explicitly programmed.

###Modern definition

A computer program is said to learn from experience (E) with respect to some class of tasks (T) and performance measure (P), if its performance at tasks in T, as measured by P, improves with experience E.

*Example:*

playing checkers.

E = the experience of playing many games of checkers

T = the task of playing checkers.

P = the probability that the program will win the next game.

## Statistics Learning v.s. Machine Learning

**Statistics:**

* A subfield of mathematics, thus more **theoretical**
* Focuses on the formalization of relationships between variables
* In the form of mathematical equations
* Data modeling culture:
  1. Data are generated by independent draws (i.i.d.)
  2. Values of the parameters are estimated from the data
  3. Model then used for information and/or prediction

**Machine Learning:**

* A subfield of computer science and artificial intelligence, thus more **applied**
* Focuses on coding systems that can learn from data, instead of explicitly programmed instructions
* Algorithmic modeling culture:
  1. Find a function f(x) - an algorithm that operates on x to predict the responses y
  2. Does not matter how data are generated
  3. Only care about prediction. Informative models are just a step along the way

## Typical ML Workflow

1. Load tidy data
2. Split into train and test sets
3. Do feature engineering
4. Choose hyperparameters
5. Fit model
6. Evaluate model
7. Decide if business outcome was accomplished









•        怎样选 feature
•        Overfitting, underfitting各自的表现和解决方式
•        Out-of-bag sample
•        解释 gradient descent, stochastic gradient descent, mini-batch gradient descent…
•        spherical hashing
 b.        Generative / Discriminant model
 c.        Curse of dimension


2. 2 REGRESSION
•        线性回归的基本假设，违背基本假设时怎么办
•        如何衡量共线性，VIF
•        对比correlation和causation，分别如何测量
•        线性回归，对数据进行各种线性变换时模型怎么变，预测值、R方、系数等等怎么变
•        为什么OLS下残差和为零
•        根据residule plot和QQ-plot判断拟合得好不好
•        没被考到过但是我能想到的potential考点
   a.        Logistic 回归的参数怎么估计
   b.        Logistic回归的LOSS function的形式. check 1point3acres for more.
   c.        线性回归中为什么使用OLS估计，OLS估计量的一些性质（BLUE）
