# 0.2. Decomposition

A time series model that can capture the trend and/or seasonality in a dataset will effectively explain the behavior of the time series on average, and should be able to accurately forecast future values.


$$
y_t = m_t + s_t + \varepsilon_t
$$
where $ y_t$ is observed time series;

​	   $m_t$ is time component (trend);

​	  $s_t$ is seasonal component;

​	  $\varepsilon_t$ is error term (random variation).

## Serial Correlation

Serial correlation refers to the phenomenon whereby observations closer together in time tend to be more similar than observations further apart in time.

Serial correlation is quantified by the autocorrelation function.

We can visualize the extent of autocorrelation in a given time series using ACF plots - plots of the autocorrelation function $Corr(y_t, y_{t+h})$ vs. the lag $h$.

## Trend

Trend is consistent directional movement in a time series, it may correspond to consistent increases and/or decreases in a given time series. Trend typifies the general, smoothed, behavior of a time series.

We can model trend with polynomials in $t$:

$m_t = \sum_{i=0}^p \beta_i t^i$

## Seasonality

Seasonality is a characteristic of a time series in which the data experience regular and predictable fluctuations according to some period.

If a time series {$y_1, y_2, ..., y_T$} exhibits seasonality with period $s$ then observations $s$ time units apart are similar to one another, more formally, we would say that the autocorrelation of lag $s$, i.e., $Corr(y_t, y_{t+2})$, is large.

We can model a seasonal affect of period $s$ with $s-1$ indicator variables:

$s_t = \sum_{j=1}^{s-1} \alpha_j x_j$

where $x_j = \{ \begin{split} &1 \; \text{if time point $t$ were in season $j$} \\ &0 \; \text{otherwise}\end{split}$

## Random variation

Random variation is unavoidable and the chief contributor to model uncertainty.