# 2.1. Multivariance

Depending on how we want to treat this external information, determines which modeling approach to take:

* **Exogenous**: the external variables influence the response, but not the other way around. We can fit a **SARIMAX** model to account for this type of relationship.

  eg. daily bart ridership and daily weather

* **Endogenous**: they influence the response and the response influences them. We can use **vector autoregression (VAR)** to simultaneously account for all of these dependences.

  eg. daily closing price of Apple stock and daily closing price of Amazon stock

## SARIMAX Model

A SARIMAX model is thought of as a SARIMA with explanatory variables.

In order to forecast a SARIMAX model, we need future value of the exogenous variables or predictions of them.

The **main limitation** of the SARIMAX is that it cannot account for a biodirectional relationship if one exists.

### ARMAX(p,q) Model

$$
\begin{split}
Y_t =& \phi_1 Y_{t-1} + ... + \phi_p Y_{t-p} + \varepsilon_t + \theta_1 \varepsilon_{t-1} + ...+ \theta_q \varepsilon_{t-q} + \beta_1 X_{1,t} + \beta_2 X_{2,t} + ... + \beta_r X{r,t} \\
=& \sum_{i=1}^p \phi_i Y_{t-i} + \varepsilon_i + \sum_{j=1}^q \theta_j \varepsilon_{t-j} + \sum_{k=1}^r \beta_k X_{k,t} \\
\text{where } & \{ X_{k,t} \} \text{ is an explanatory "exogenous" time series } k=1,2,...,r \\
& \beta_k = COV(Y_t, X_{k,t+h}), h \in Z \text{ is called cross correlation and can be useful in determining how the $X$ information is used}
\end{split}
$$

###ARIMAX & SARIMAX Models

If {$Y_t$} is not stationary, we differencing it as necessary to become stationary. The same level of differencing is also automatically applied to the exogenous series.

<<<<<<< HEAD
###[Using R to fit SARIMAX models](../R/1.1.TS.md/###SARIMAX-model)

=======
>>>>>>> origin/sfcta
##Vector Autoregression (VAR) Model

In this framework all variables are treated symmetrically and so we revise our notation and denote $r$ endogenous variables as {$Y_{1,t}$}, {$Y_{2,t}$}, {$Y_{3,t}$}, ..., {$Y_{r,t}$}. This model consists of $r$ equations (one for each variable) that are each autoregressions of order $p$.
$$
\begin{split}
Y_{1,t} =& c_1 + \sum_{i=1}^p \phi_{11,i} Y_{1,t-i} + \sum_{i=1}^p \phi_{12,i} Y_{2,t-i} + ... + \sum_{i=1}^p \phi_{1r,i} Y_{r,t-i} + \varepsilon_{1,t} \\
Y_{2,t} =& c_2 + \sum_{i=1}^p \phi_{21,i} Y_{1,t-i} + \sum_{i=1}^p \phi_{22,i} Y_{2,t-i} + ... + \sum_{i=1}^p \phi_{2r,i} Y_{r,t-i} + \varepsilon_{2,t} \\
... \\
Y_{r,t} =& c_r + \sum_{i=1}^p \phi_{r1,i} Y_{1,t-i} + \sum_{i=1}^p \phi_{r2,i} Y_{2,t-i} + ... + \sum_{i=1}^p \phi_{rr,i} Y_{r,t-i} + \varepsilon_{r,t} \\
\text{where} \; & \{ \varepsilon_{k,t} \} \sim WN(0, \sigma_k^2) \; \text{for} \; k=1,2,...,r. \\
\text{Define} \; & \vec{Y_t} =
  \begin{bmatrix}
  Y_{1,t} \\
  Y_{2,t} \\
  \vdots \\
  Y_{r,t}
  \end{bmatrix}, \;
\vec{c_t} =
  \begin{bmatrix}
  c_{1} \\
  c_{2} \\
  \vdots \\
  c_{r}
  \end{bmatrix}, \;
\vec{\varepsilon_t} =
  \begin{bmatrix}
  \varepsilon_{1,t} \\
  \varepsilon_{2,t} \\
  \vdots \\
  \varepsilon_{r,t}
  \end{bmatrix}, \;
\vec{A_i} =
  \begin{bmatrix}
  \phi_{11,i} & \phi_{12,i} & \dots & \phi_{1r,i} \\
  \phi_{21,i} & \phi_{22,i} & \dots & \phi_{2r,i} \\
  \vdots & \vdots & & \vdots \\
  \phi_{r1,i} & \phi_{r2,i} & \dots & \phi_{rr,i} \\
  \end{bmatrix} \\
\vec{Y_t} =& \vec{c_t} + A_1 \vec{Y_{t-1}} + A_x \vec{Y_{t-2}} + \dots + A_p \vec{Y_{t-p}} + \vec{\varepsilon_t}
\end{split}
$$
The general VAR(p) model contains $2r + pr^2$ parameters. To simplify estimation avoid overfitting we typically try to keep $r$ and/or $p$ small.

### Order Selection

order selection in this context is based on predictive accuracy and/or goodness-of-fit. Estimation is typically carried out with least squares.

### VARMA

Model exists but are not commonly used in practice.

###VARX

<<<<<<< HEAD
Models are commonly used when you have exogenous and endogenous variables.

###[Using R to fit VAR models](../R/1.1.TS.md/###VAR-model)
=======
Models are commonly used when you have exogenous and endogenous variables.
>>>>>>> origin/sfcta
