# Launching

## Structure

| SQL (RDBMS) | MongoDB    |
| ----------- | ---------- |
| database    | database   |
| table       | collection |
| row         | document   |
| column      | field      |

## Commonly Supported Data Types

- Null: `null`
- Boolean: `true`,`false`
- Number: 64 bit float (default), `NumberInt()` (4-byte), `NumberLong()` (8 byte)
- String: UTF-8 characters 
- Date: Stored as millisecond since the epoch (No time zone). `new Date()`
- Regular expression: Use JavaScript’s regular expression syntax. 
- Array: `[Element1, Element2,...]`
  - Used for ordered operations and unordered operations.
  - Can contain different data types.
  - Atomic updates to modify the contents of arrays.
- Embedded document: Entire documents can be embedded as value.
- Object ID: 12-Byte ID for documents and a default for “_id”
  - Generated by the driver on the client.
  - Every document in MongoDB must have an “_id” key.
    - Its value can be any type, but needs to be unique for a collection.
    - Default is ObjectId: 4 Timestamp(sec) + 3 Machine(Hash of Machine's Host) + 2 Process ID + 3 Increment. 
    - Return by `ObjectId()`.
- Binary data: String of arbitrary bytes.
- Code: JavaScript code. 

## Running MongoDB Server

```shell
mongod
```

- Primary daemon process for the MongoDB system.
- Running server background.

```shell
ps aux | grep mongo
```

Using this command to show the running mongo processes, kill the useless one by process no.

## Launch Mongo shell

### Under Terminal

```shell
mongo
```

The mongo shell is an interactive JavaScript interface to mongod.

### Using Studio 3T

## MongoDB shell

* Basic math
* JavaScript
* Basic CRUD
* Connecting to internal/external database

