# MongoDB

## Why NoSQL

* Json (JavaScript Object Notation)
  * Open-standard file format that uses human-readable text to transmit data objects consisting of key-value pairs and array data types (or any other serializable value). 
  * Commonly used for browser–server communication for REST API.

* Data and traffic increase: as a solution, started to store data in the clusters (scaling out rather than scaling up). 
  - Most relational databases are not designed to run on clusters and have reliability issues.
  - Run large data on clusters of many smaller and cheaper machines.
  - Cheaper and reliable.
* New data types, schema changes.
  - doesn’t fit in a table-like structure. 
* Impedance mismatching
  - Relation model not equal in-memory data structure (object).
  - For application development productivity: better mapping with in-memory data structures for the application.
* Example of non-relational database
  * google BigTable and Amazon Dynamo

## NoSQL (Not Only SQL)

* Take schemaless data.
* Non-relational.
* Open-source.
* Trade off traditional consistency for other properties.
* Run on clusters.

## SQL vs NoSQL

###  Relational Model - SQL

* Database is a collection of relations.

* Each relation has attributes.
* Each relation has a collection of tuples.

#### Pros

* Persistent data storage.
* **Concurrency Control - ACID**: Atomic, Consistent, Isolated, Durable Transaction.
* Standard Model:
  * Different vendors’ query languages are similar.
  * Transaction operations work in the similar way.

#### Cons

* Impedance mismatch.
* Hard to scale.
* Fixed Schema.

### NoSQL

#### Pros

* Mostly open source.
* Schema-less.
* Good for non-relational data.
* Scalable.
* Runs well on distributed system.

#### Cons

* Installation.
* toolsets still maturing.

##NoSQL Type

###Aggregate-oriented

Aggregate: Collection of related objects treated as a unit. 

For analyzing data, you might want to place some data together as a unit. 

* On a cluster, an aggregate is stored together on a node. 
* A single aggregate is a unit of atomic updates. 

Aggregate-oriented databases use aggregates indexed by key for data lookup. 

Aggregate-oriented databases don’t have ACID transactions that span multiple aggregates.

* cf. RDBMS is aggregate-ignorant. 

####Pros

* Provides clearer semantics to consider by focusing on the aggregate unit used by applications.
* Better design choice for running on a cluster. 

####Cons

* Drawing boundaries of an aggregate is not easy.
* When a goal of data management/analysis is not clear, aggregate models might not be the best choice.
* Doesn’t support ACID transactions. 

####Example:

* Key-value Database: Redis, Rick, Berkeley DB;

* Document Database: **MongoDB**, CouchDB, OrientDB, RavenDB;

  For storing and retrieving documents with self-contained schema including XML, JSON, etc:

  - Store documents in the value part of the key.

  Schemaless:

  - Schema of the data can differ across documents, but these documents can still belong to the same collection.
  - Some attributes do not exist in another document.
  - New attributes can be created without defining them in the existing documents. 

* Columnar Database: Cassandra, Hbase, Amazon SimpleDB.

###Relationship-oriented

Relational database with complex schema:

* Hard to understand, query, generalize and integrate data.
* cf. Aggregate-oriented NoSQL - Atomicity is only supported within a single aggregate. 

####Example:

Graph Database: Neo4J, OrientDB, FlockDB.

* Nodes (Object) and edges (Relationships) representation.
* Relationships and their attributes are explicitly defined.
* For data with complex relationships:
  * Focuses on graph traverse (more than insert).
  * cf. RDBMS : Many joins can cause poor performance.
* Running on a single server rather than distributed across clusters. 