# 1.0. Operations

```
use DB_Name			# Create/Choose a databse
db					# Check which database you're using
db.collection_name	# Access collection from the db variable
```

##Create/Insert

* Add a document to a collection: `db.collectionName.insert(document)`.
* Bulk insert: takes an **array** of document: `db.collectionName.insert([document1, document2])`.
* Import raw data: `mongoimport`
  * Using under terminal rather than mongo shell.
  * Imports content from an Extended JSON, CSV, or TSV export created by `mongoexport`, or potentially, another third-party export tool.
  * Options:
    * `--db`: The name of the database on which to run the `mongoimport`.
    * `--collection`: The collection to import.
    * `--file`: The location and name of a file containing the data to import.
    * `--mode`: insert, upsert, merge 
      * insert (Default): Allows to import a document that contains a duplicate value for a field with a unique index, such as _id. 
      * upsert: Replace existing documents with matching documents from the import file and insert all other documents. 
      * merge: Merge existing documents that match a document in the import file with the new document and insert all other documents. 

## Read

`db.collectionName.find(query, projection)`

`db.collectionName.findOne(query, projection)`: same as `db.collectionName.find()` method with **a limit of 1**.

* Returns a subset of document in a collection.
* `query`: Specifies selection filter using query operators. To return all documents in a collection, omit this parameter or pass an empty document `({})`.
  * **Range**
    * `{<field>:{range_operator:<value>}}`
    * `$lt, $lte, $gt, $gte, $ne, $eq`
  * **OR and AND**
    * `$and`: perform a logical AND operation on an array of two or more expressions;
    * `$or`: query values for multiple keys:
      * `{$or/$and:[{<field1>:<value1>}, {<field2>:<value2>}, ...]}`
    * `$in, $nin`: query values for a single keys:
      * `{<field>:{$in/$nin: [<value1>,<value2>,...]}}`
  * **Type-specific queries**
    * Regular Expression
      * Pattern matching strings in queries。
      * Follows Perl Compatible Regular Expression (PCRE) version 8.39 with UTF-8 support.
      * `{<field>:{$regex:<pattern>}}`
    * Embedded documents
      * `<query>` for the entire document: find exact matches of the subdocument.
      * `<query>` for the individual key/value pairs (embedded document): using the dot notation to reach into an embedded document.
* `projection`: Specifies the fields to return in the documents that match the query filter.
  * Query Arrays: same way as querying scalars.
    * `{<field1>:<value>, <field2>:<value>, ...}`
    * `1` or `true` to include the field in the return documents.
    * `0` or `false` to exclude the field.
    * For the `_id` field, you do not have to explicitly specify `_id: 1` to return the `_id` field. The `find()` method always returns the `_id` field unless you specify `_id: 0` to suppress the field.
  * Project operators: define fields to return
    - `$slice`: limits the number of elements projected from an array
      - Need to know the index of the element.
      - `{<field>:{"$slice":N}}`
      - Positive N: first N elements
      - Negative N: last N elements
      - `{<field>:{"$slice":[skip,limit]}}`
      - `skip`: the number of items in the array to skip
      - `limit`: the number of items to return
    - `$`: returns the first element in an array that matches the query condition
      - `{<field>.$:1}`
      - No need to know the index of the element.
      - Only one positional `$` operator may appear in the projection document.
      - **The array field should appear in the query document.**
      - **The query document should only contain a single condition on the array field being projected.** Multiple conditions may override each other internally and lead to undefined behavior.
      - Same as `{<field>:{$elemMatch:{}}}`
    - `$elemMatch`: projects the first element in an array that matches the specified `$elemMatch` conditio
      - `{<field>:{$elemMatch:{<query1>,<query2>,...}}}` where `<query>` is same as `<query>` in `find()` method.
      - Allows to project based on a condition not in the query document.
      - Allows to project based on multiple fields in the array's embedded documents.
      - Compare all clauses (multiple conditions) in a single array element.
* Returns a cursor: by using cursors you can control the output of a query by including cursor methods.
  * Cursor methods: modify the way that the underlying query is executed.
  * `db.collectionName.find().method()`
  * `count()`: modifies the cursor to return the number of documents.
  * `pretty()`: configures the cursor to display results in an easy to read format.
  * `sort({<field>:<value>})`: returns results ordered according to a sort specification.
    * 1: ascending;
    * -1: descending.
  * `limit(number)`: constrains the size of a cursor's result set.

## Update

`db.collectionName.updata(query, update, options)`:

* `query`: **Required**, criteria to filter, same as the `query` under `find()` method.
* `update`: **Required**, new document/change criteria.
* `upsert`: When no document meets the Query criteria, it creates (inserts) a new document (default is false). If there are documents that match the query criteria, update() performs an update. 
  * `{upsert : true|false}`
* `multiple-update`: Update multiple documents that meet the query criteria (default = false). By default, update() only updates the first document found that matches the criteria. 
  * `{mult : true|false}`
* `writeConcern`: The level of write acknowledgment requested from MongoDB for write operations including the number of primary and replicas to send acknowledgement and timeout specification. (More details - https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/write-concern/) 

In order to update certain portions of a document, use atomic update modifier under `update`:

* Field modifier

  | Name    | Description                                                  | Command                                                    |
  | ------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------- |
  | $set    | Sets the value of a field in a document.                     | `$set: {<field1>: <value1>, ...}`                          |
  | $unset  | Remove the specified field from a document.                  | `$unset: {<field1>: "", ...}`                              |
  | $inc    | Increments the value of the field by the specified amount.   | `$inc: {<field1>: <amount1>, <field2>: <amount2>, ...}`    |
  | $rename | Renames a field.                                             | `$rename: {<field1>:<newName1>, <field2>:<newName2>, ...}` |
  | $min    | Only updates the field if the specified value is less than the existing field value.<br />Equal to or less than / at most. | `$min: {<field1>:<value1>, ...}`                           |
  | $max    | Only updates the field if the specified value is greater than the existing field value.<br />Equal to or greater than / at least. | `$max: {field1>:<value1>, ...}`                            |

* Array modifier

  | Name  | Description                                                  | Command                                                      |
  | ----- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
  | $push | Adds an item to an array.                                    | `$push: {<field1>:<value1>, ...}`                            |
  | $pop  | Removes the first or last item of an array.                  | `$pop: {<field>:<-1|1>, ...}`<br />-1: remove the first element of an array;<br />1: remove the last element of an array. |
  | $pull | Removes **all** array elements that match a specified query. | `$pull: {<field1>:<value|condition>, <field2>:<value|condition>, ...}` |
  | $     | Acts as a placeholder to update the **first** element that matches the query condition. | `$set: {"<array>.$":value}`                                  |
  | $[]   | Acts as a placeholder to update **all** elements that matches the query condition. | `$set: {"<array>.$[]":value}`                                |

## Delete

* Delete: permanently delete documents from the database.
  * `db.collectionName.deleteMany(filter)`: Removes **all** documents that match the filter from a collection.
  * `db.collectionName.deleteOne(filter)`: Removes **a single** document from a collection.
  * `db.collectionName.drop()`: Delete **entire collection** efficiently.

## Aggregation Pipeline

Groups values from multiple documents, and performs operations on the grouped data to return a single result. 

* `db.collecionName.aggregate({Transform_operator_1:criteria_1}, {Transform_operator_2:criteria_2}, ...)`

* `transform_operators` performs operations including filtering, transformation, grouping, sorting using `$match`, `$project`, `$lookup`, `$group`, `$unwind`, `$out`, etc. 

* `$match`: filter document with criteria.

  * `{$match:{<query>}}`

* `$project`: passes along the documents with the requested fields to the next stage in the pipeline.

  * `{$project:{<specification(s)>}}`

  * | `<specification(s)>`    | Description                                                |
    | ----------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- |
    | `<field>: <1 or true>`  | Specifies the inclusion of a field.                        |
    | `_id: <0 or false>`     | Specifies the suppression of the `_id` field.              |
    | `<field>: <expression>` | Adds a new field or resets the value of an existing field. |
    | `<field>:<0 or false>`  | Specifies the exclusion of a field.                        |

* `$unwind`: deconstructs an array field from the input documents to output a document for each element. Each output document is the input document with the value of the array field replaced by the element.

  * `{$unwind:<field path>}`
    * `<field path>`: field path to an array field.
    * To specify a field path, prefix the field name with a dollar sign `$` and enclose in quotes.

* `$group`: group documents based on certain fields and combine their values.

  * `{$group: {_id:<expression>, <field1>:{<accumulator1>:<expression1>}, ... }} `
    * `_id` field is **required**, which contains the distinct group by key. 
    * Specify an `_id` value of null to calculate accumulated values for all the input documents as a whole.
    *  `<expression>` could be `<field path>` or a literal value. 
    * `<accumulator>`: `$sum`, `$avg`, `$min`, `$max`, etc.

* `$sort`: collect all document and properly sort them and send the individual shard’s sorted results. 

  * `{$sort: {<field1>:<sort order>, <field2>:<sort order> ... }} `